# Forest damage from the heavy early snowfall of Superstorm Sandy differs by tree size, species, and landscape position

## Abstract
In late October 2012, Superstorm Sandy led to costly damage throughout the mid-Atlantic coast of the United States and the deciduous forests of central Appalachia.  While the storm is perhaps best remembered for its high winds and storm surge impacts to the mid-Atlantic coast of the USA, it also produced a heavy early snowfall that damaged the inland forests of the central Appalachian Mountains. Through a combination of fieldwork and remote sensing analysis, we characterized the patterns of storm damage at the Fernow Experimental Forest (FEF) in Parsons, WV.  In the field, we visually assessed storm damage on 5,506 individual trees from 78 field plots within 12 forest management compartments at the FEF.  Damage was particularly severe on smaller understory trees and in species that had likely not yet dropped their leaves.  Aggregated to a plot level, Sandy damaged between one and 90 percent of the basal area.   The field data, as well as an NDVI-based change detection of pre- and post-storm 2m spatial resolution images from the Geoeye-1 satellite indicated that damage was more severe on steep slopes near streams.  If storms like Superstorm Sandy become more common with climate change, these variable patterns of storm damage will be important to incorporate into management plans for forest health, logging revenues, biodiversity, and nutrient retention.
