Forest damage from the heavy early snowfall of Superstorm Sandy differs
by tree size, species, and landscape position
================

> ### Abstract
> 
> In late October 2012, Superstorm Sandy led to costly damage throughout
> the mid-Atlantic coast of the United States and the deciduous forests
> of central Appalachia. While the storm is perhaps best remembered for
> its high winds and storm surge impacts to the mid-Atlantic coast of
> the USA, it also produced a heavy early snowfall that damaged the
> inland forests of the central Appalachian Mountains. Through a
> combination of fieldwork and remote sensing analysis, we characterized
> the patterns of storm damage at the Fernow Experimental Forest (FEF)
> in Parsons, WV. In the field, we visually assessed storm damage on
> 5,506 individual trees from 78 field plots within 12 forest management
> compartments at the FEF. Damage was particularly severe on smaller
> understory trees and in species that had likely not yet dropped their
> leaves. Aggregated to a plot level, Sandy damaged between one and 90
> percent of the basal area. The field data, as well as an NDVI-based
> change detection of pre- and post-storm 2m spatial resolution images
> from the Geoeye-1 satellite indicated that damage was more severe on
> steep slopes near streams. If storms like Superstorm Sandy become more
> common with climate change, these variable patterns of storm damage
> will be important to incorporate into management plans for forest
> health, logging revenues, biodiversity, and nutrient retention.

## Introduction

On October 29, 2012, Superstorm Sandy hit the east coast of the United
States and became the second most costly storm in US history, causing an
estimated $20 billion USD in property damage and killing 191 people
(NOAA 2012a). While Sandy’s high winds, heavy rain, and storm surge
wreaked havoc on the coast, unseasonably early and heavy snowfall
impacted inland regions. According to the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Fernow Experimental Forest (FEF)
near Parsons, West Virginia received between 46 and 61 cm of snowfall
from October 29 through November 1, 2012 (NOAA 2012b, 2013). For
context, the month with the highest average snowfall in Parsons is
January with approximately 51 cm. The average annual snowfall for Parson
is approximately 122 cm, with maximum average snowfall typically
occurring in December (20 cm), January (51 cm), and February (46 cm),
according to NOAA (NOAA 2018). Wind speeds reached approximately 20 m
s-1 in some parts of West Virginia, and the state overall incurred over
$10 million in damage (FEMA 2012). The early season snowfall created a
buildup of heavy, wet snow on trees that, in some cases, had not yet
lost their leaves. This led to widespread damage and even collapse of
many trees in the FEF and surrounding areas (Figure 1; Keighton et
al. 2016; Andrew and Hartman 2015). The impacts of natural disasters,
such as Superstorm Sandy, on managed forests can often be difficult to
assess because they are not anticipated and prior data is not always
available. Also, the impacts of such large disturbances are typically
quite variable across the landscape, and are altered in important ways
by topography, soils, stand structure, and species composition (Andrew
and Hartman 2015; Stueve et al. 2007; Turner and Dale 1998, Tanner et
al. 2014; Boose et al. 2004, 1994), therefore existing information
should be paired with new technologies to assess these impacts in a
useful way.

While there are very few studies available to document the severity and
spatial pattern of storms damaging trees through early heavy snowfall,
much relevant work examines ice storm damage. For example, in both the
Appalachian and Adirondack mountains of the eastern United States, ice
storm damage is typically, but not always (Millward and Kraft 2004),
greater on south- and east-facing slopes, as well as in riparian areas
(Lafon et al. 1999, 2004; Stueve et al. 2007; Millward et al. 2010). The
type of damage can also differ across the landscape. In response to a
1994 ice storm in the central Appalachians, canopy damage was greatest
on gentle slopes, while damage to the tree bole was greatest on steeper
slopes (Lafon et al. 1999, 2004).

While the early, heavy snowfall from Superstorm Sandy is a relatively
uncommon event, extreme weather events are likely to increase as the
global climate continues to change (Repetto and Easton 2010; Grinsted et
al. 2012, 2013; Trenberth et al. 2015). These changes have important
implications for forest management, as foresters attempt to manage
forests to be more resilient and adaptive in the face of increasing
weather extremes and the varied forest disturbances that may result
(Dale et al. 2001, 2016; McBean 2004). However, achieve these management
goals, it is essential to understand the varying severity of storm
disturbance, and its spatial pattern on the landscape. Here, we studied
the effects of Superstorm Sandy by using extensive fieldwork and
high-resolution satellite data to carefully assess the type and spatial
pattern of damage across the complex landscape of the Fernow
Experimental Forest, West Virginia. Following the relevant work on ice
storm damage, we hypothesized that the early, heavy snows of Superstorm
Sandy would more strongly impact (a) species that still had leaves
during the event (e.g. most oaks, American beech), (b) sub-canopy trees
with weaker wood, and (c) more shallow-rooted trees on steep slopes near
deeply-incised stream channels.

## Study Area

The Fernow Experimental Forest (FEF)—a 1,902 ha outdoor laboratory
established in 1934 and situated within the Monongahela National Forest
near Parsons, West Virginia, USA—has a rich history of data collection
from a series of permanent growth plots, providing a rare opportunity to
evaluate damage from Superstorm Sandy on temperate forests in the
Appalachian region. Elevation in the FEF ranges from approximately
500-1,100m, with generally steep slopes and shallow soils. Precipitation
is consistent throughout the year with an annual average of 1,458 mm
year−1. The mean annual temperature is 9.3 °C (Adams et al. 2012).
Stands on the FEF are rich in tree species, and have been studied
extensively since the 1950s. Early-successional species, such as black
birch (Betula lenta), black cherry (Prunus serotina), and tulip-poplar
(Liriodendron tulipifera) are dominant in younger stands, whereas
late-successional species, such as sugar maple (Acer saccharum) and
northern red oak (Quercus rubra), are more dominant in mature stands
(Gilliam et al. 2006).

We used 78 permanently marked growth plots (hereafter referred to as
field plots) in twelve forest management compartments in FEF for this
study (Figure 2; Table 1). Each tree in these field plots is measured
periodically so our damage assessments added to an existing record of
measurements and allowed us to assess the damage from Sandy because the
previous state of each tree was known. This long record of measurement
also means we can go back and further assess the same trees in the
future to look at long-term impacts.

Thirty-one field plots were located within seven management compartments
that are greater than 100 years old and serve as reference stands for a
number of ongoing studies at the FEF (Table 1). We also sampled in
several compartments that have received various experimental treatments
(Table 1). Watershed 7 (WS7; 24 ha) was clearcut in sections between
1963 and 1967 and treated with herbicide until 1969, while Watershed 3
(WS3; 34 ha) was cut between 1969 and 1972 and subsequently used for a
fertilization experiment. WS3 has received annual aerial applications of
35 kg nitrogen (N) ha-1 yr-1 as ammonium sulfate, beginning in 1989.
Compartment 8 was established in 1949 and divided into subcompartments
(A, B, and C) that were harvested using different methods, while one
subcompartment (E) was not harvested.

## Methods

We conducted field work during summer 2013, approximately eight months
after the storm. We assessed damage in three ways: 1) by visually
categorizing damage on individual trees; 2) aggregating these
categorical assessments to field plot level; 3) and from a change
analysis of satellite imagery. We used a categorical damage method
originally proposed by Peterson (2007) to survey all trees greater than
10 cm diameter at breast height (DBH) within 78 field plots in 12 forest
management compartments (Table 1). For each tree, we measured DBH and
qualitatively assessed the damage level (Figure 3), as well as assessing
whether the damage was recent and likely to be caused by Superstorm
Sandy. We did not include trees with damage caused by previous
disturbances in our analysis. Every tree greater than 10 cm DBH in the
sampled field plots received a categorical damage assessment using a
scale of increasing severity (Peterson 2007): Class 1 = intact (tree
displayed no observable damage that could be reasonably attributed to
Superstorm Sandy), Class 2 = broken branches, Class 3 = bent, Class 4 =
leaning, Class 5 = crown broken, Class 6 = snapped stem, and Class 7 =
uprooted (Figure 3). We further stratified our sample into canopy and
subcanopy trees to assess how the storm may have impacted trees at both
levels.

To summarize damage at the field plot level, we assigned the categorical
damage assessments to fractional damage values per tree, where: class 1
= 0 damage, class 2 = 0.25, class 3/4/5 = 0.50, and class 6/7 = 1.0. We
then multiplied these fractional damage values by the relative basal
area of each tree in a plot to estimate the total basal area damaged per
plot, and then converted that plot-level damaged basal area to a
percentage of the total basal area that had been damaged in each plot.
To identify broad spatial patterns and potential relationships between
topographic factors and storm damage, we used regression to compare
plot-level summary values of the percent damage with plot-level
measurements of slope, aspect, and distance to streams. We derived slope
and aspect variables from a 3-m resolution digital elevation model, and
we derived the distance to streams using Euclidean distance measures
calculated in a GIS. By averaging plot-level summary values among all
plots in a compartment, we also extended the scale of this analysis to
the compartment level for these same comparisons.

To further explore the spatial pattern of forest disturbance, we also
used a change detection of two approximately anniversary-date
high-resolution satellite images. We used a 27 June 2012 Geoeye-1 image
from the satellite archive to represent the pre-storm forest condition,
and we used a tasked image, collected on 6 June 2014, to represent the
post-storm forest condition. These satellite datasets provided 2-m
resolution data in four spectral bands (Blue: 450-510 nm, Green: 510-580
nm, Red: 655-690 nm, and Near Infrared \[NIR\]: 780-920 nm). We
orthorectified both images separately using 3-m LiDAR-derived elevation
data, and we used the CoST method for atmospheric and radiometric
correction (Chavez 1996). We masked out clouds, cloud shadows, and
non-forested areas using a land cover map produced by the Chesapeake Bay
Program Office in 2006. We also masked several anomalous pixels caused
by an airplane flying directly over one of our study plots in WS7. From
the satellite spectral data, we computed the normalized difference
vegetation index (NDVI) to serve as a proxy for the amount of healthy
vegetation in the canopy (Sellers 1987; Ramsey et al. 1997, 1998, 2001;
Erhlich et al. 1994, Millward and Kraft 2004, Stueve et al. 2007).
Finally, to assess spatial patterns of canopy damage, we calculated the
change in NDVI using image differencing between the pre-Sandy 2012 image
and the post-Sandy 2014 image (Singh 1988).

## Results

Of the 5,506 total trees sampled, 4,226 (or approximately 77 percent)
belonged to the sub-canopy and 1,280 (or approximately 23 percent)
belonged to the canopy. At the individual tree level, we observed
considerable damage in both the canopy and sub-canopy trees; over half
of all sampled trees were damaged to some degree. More trees were
damaged in the sub-canopy (59 percent) than were damaged in the canopy
(34 percent). The type of damage also strongly differed by canopy
position. Bent and snapped trees were much more common in the
sub-canopy, while broken branches were more common in overstory trees
(Figure 4).

Damage also differed strongly by tree species (Table 2; Figure 4). The
exclusively sub-canopy species of Acer pensylvanicum was the most often
damaged across species, particularly having the highest average BA
damage percentage and the highest percentage of snapped stems (Table2;
Figure 4). Other heavily damaged species included those that had likely
not yet dropped their leaves, such as Quercus rubra and Q. montana
(Figure 4), which typically exhibited damage as broken branches (class
2). Liriodendron tulipifera was the least damaged canopy species, with
72 percent of all sampled trees classified as intact (Table 2).

By aggregating individual tree damage to the plot-level, our estimates
of the percentage of basal area damaged ranged from less than one
percent to over 90 percent. The average damage per plot was about 39
percent of total basal area. At the plot-level, damage was not
significantly related to any geographic factor, including slope, aspect,
elevation, or proximity to streams, though there was a slight positive
(nonsignificant) relationship between greater percent damage and higher
slope as well as a slight negative (nonsignificant) relationship between
greater percent damage and proximity to streams. We also summarized plot
damage within the twelve forest compartments where we conducted
fieldwork and found a significant positive relationship (R2 = 0.68)
between the average slope percentage and the average percentage of basal
area damaged within the twelve compartments where we conducted fieldwork
(Figure 5). These plot- and compartment-level findings were corroborated
by our change detection analysis from high-resolution satellite images.
While there were also important non-storm related forest disturbance
effects captured in this analysis (e.g. due to forest management),
damage was clearly greatest along high-slope areas and riparian
corridors (Figure 6).

## Discussion

Our findings are different from studies examining the impact of ice
storms on tree species. Bruederle and Stearn (1985) found that winter
ice storm damage varied by tree growth form and wood strength. In their
study, Acer rubrum, Acer saccharum, Fagus grandifolia, and Quercus
borealis were moderately susceptible to ice storm damage, while Prunus
serotina, Fraxinus americana, and Betula lenta were highly susceptible.
Also, most of the damage from the ice storm was found in the overstory.
Similarly, Turcotte et al. (2012) found that ice storms in Ohio more
heavily damaged larger, more mature trees. In our study, the greatest
damage, both in terms of proportion of trees damaged and in severity of
damage occurred in the understory (Figure 4). We found that Quercus
rubra, P. serotina, F. grandifolia, A. rubrum, A. saccharum, and A.
pensylvanicum exhibited the most damage, and subcanopy trees of these
species were more heavily damaged than canopy trees of these species.
One possible reason for these differences is that during Superstorm
Sandy, some tree species, most notably the Quercus and Fagus had not all
lost their leaves which then served to capture and hold the heavy wet
snow.

Because much of the observed field damage was to the subcanopy, the
observed spatial patterns of storm damage from satellite imagery were
subtle and only apparent in locations where a greater proportion of the
canopy trees were damaged at more severe levels. At the Fernow, our
field and satellite data highlight that the canopy damage was more
intense in areas near stream channels. This pattern corroborates initial
observations of work crews that had to clear heavy damage along the
roads paralleling Elk Lick Run, the main stream draining much of the
Fernow. It also supports observations of the large amounts of coarse
woody debris in the stream channel (Andrew and Hartman 2015). Several
complementary factors may have intensified the canopy damage on these
steeper slopes near the stream channel. First, since upper elevation
trees tend to lose their leaves before lower elevations, a greater
proportion of the trees in the valley bottom may have still had leaves
during the snow event. Second, while winds were generally light during
the storm, it is possible that the wind pattern caused snowfall to
funnel into the valley and have a heavier snow load. Finally, the stream
channels are often incised to bedrock, so that many trees on steep
riparian slopes have very shallow root systems. While we did not have
many plots within these steep riparian environments, we anecdotally
observed many trees that had uprooted by shearing from the bedrock and
falling downslope toward or into the stream channel.

Even with the availability of anniversary date, high-resolution Geoeye-1
satellite images collected before and after Sandy, our study highlights
several challenges of detecting storm-related disturbance with satellite
data. The four-band spectral resolution led us to focus on NDVI, which
is a commonly used vegetation index that has been used in numerous
applications related to canopy vigor and structure (see Sellers 1987,
Ramsey et al. 1997, 1998, 2001, Erhlich et al. 1994, Millward and Kraft
2004, Stueve et al. 2007). Despite the popularity of the NDVI, several
other vegetation indices that incorporate spectral information on
additional wavelengths not sampled by Geoeye-1 have shown more promise
in detecting patterns of forest disturbance. These include the
Normalized Difference Infrared Index (NDII, Wang et al. 2010) and
derivatives of the Tasseled Cap Transformation (Jin and Sader 2005,
Healey et al. 2005). Spectral properties of vegetation reflectance also
vary by scale and the structural attributes of ecosystems, complicating
the scaling of vegetation signatures like disturbance with limited
spectral information (Asner 1998). A further challenge to capturing
storm damage at broader spatial scales is the characteristically spotty
aerial extent of winter storms (Bennett 1959, Bruederle and Stearn
1985). The widespread, yet spatially variable patterns of disturbance
observed in our study are consistent with this finding.  
Our study highlights that there are multiple and variable drivers of
spatial patterns in ice and snow storm damage in eastern US forests. We
found slope steepness to be the geographic variable most related to
patterns of storm damage from Superstorm Sandy, which is consistent with
work by Isaacs et al. (2014). However, Lafon (2006) and Stueve et
al. (2007) found that slope was a much weaker predictor than elevation
and aspect. Stueve et al. even removed slope as a variable in multiple
regression models of damage in their study area because of its weak
influence. Stueve et al.’s field plots covered a greater range of slope
steepness than our study, finding that damage increased with increasing
slope steepness up to about 20 degrees, after which the relationship
leveled off and slope steepness no longer impacted damage level. Stueve
et al. propose that the leveling off could be related to the generally
stressful conditions and sparser vegetation in higher slope areas,
causing lower NDVI values even before the storm and therefore less
change following the storm. In further support of Stueve et al.’s
findings, Shi et al. (2013) found that windward aspects and the
elevation zone from 400-1000m were the most sensitive to ice storm
damage (in subtropical forests), they also identified the highest damage
from ice storms in areas with slope between 15 and 35 degrees. In higher
slope areas, the level of damage gradually decreased.

Further research is needed to more effectively bridge the scaling issue
between individual tree damage and the broader spatial pattern of
disturbance on the landscape, particularly when balancing the effort of
field work with the availability of satellite and aerial platforms that
have different spectral, spatial, and temporal resolutions. The ability
to detect and characterize different types of disturbance across a
landscape using remote sensing techniques presents an ongoing challenge,
but also a critical opportunity for forest managers to rapidly assess
damage and focus clean-up and restoration efforts on the most hard-hit
areas.

## Acknowledgments

We thank Mark Burnham for his help with field work. Funding for this
research came from the USDA Forest Service (cooperative agreement with
WVU), the US Environmental Protection Agency Science to Achieve Results
(STAR) program, the NASA West Virginia Space Grant Consortium Graduate
Research Fellowship program, the Long-Term Research in Environmental
Biology (LTREB) program at the National Science Foundation (Grant Nos.
DEB-0417678 and DEB-1019522), and West Virginia University.

## REFERENCES

Adams, M.B., Edwards, PJ, Ford, W.M. Schuler, T.M., Thomas-VanGundy, M.,
Wood, F. 2012. Fernow Experimental Forest: Research History and
Opportunities. Experimental Forests and Ranges EFR-S. USDA Forest
Service, Washington, DC. 26 p. 

Andrew RG and Hartman KJ. 2015. Uneven inputs of woody debris to
Appalachian streams from superstorm Sandy. Can J Fish Aquat Sci 72: 1–6.

Asner GP, Martin RE, Anderson CB, and Knapp DE. 2015. Quantifying forest
canopy traits: imaging spectroscopy versus field survey. Remote Sens
Environ 158: 15–27.

Bennett I. 1959. Glaze: its meteorology and climatology, geographical
distribution, and economic effects. US Army, Quartermaster Research and
Engineering Command Technical Report EP-105, Natick, MA.

Boose ER, Serrano MI, and Foster DR. 2004. Landscape and regional
impacts of hurricanes in Puerto Rico. Ecol Monogr 74: 335–352.

Boose ER, Foster DR, and Fluet M. 1994. Hurricane impacts to tropical
and temperate forest landscapes. Ecol Monogr 64: 369–400.

Bruederle LP and Stearns FW. 1985. Ice storm damage to a southern
Wisconsin mesic forest. B Torrey Bot Club 112: 167-175.

Chavez PS. 1996. Image-based atmospheric corrections–revised and
improved. Photogramm Eng Rem S 62: 1025-1036.

Dale VH, Joyce LA, McNulty S, et al. 2001. Climate change and forest
disturbances. Bioscience 51: 723–734.

Dale VH, Hughes MJ, and Hayes DJ. 2016. Climate change and the future of
natural disturbances in the Central Hardwood Region. In Natural
Disturbances and Historic Range of Variation, 355-369.

Ehrlich D, Estes JE, and Singh A. 1994. Applications of NOAA AVHRR 1 km
data for environmental monitoring. Int J Remote Sens 15: 145-161.

FEMA. 2012. West Virginia–Hurricane Sandy. FEMA Preliminary Damage
Assessment Rep. FEMA-4093-DR, 3 pp. Available online at
<http://www.fema.gov/media-library-data/20130726-1901-25045->
2859/dhs\_ocfo\_pda\_report\_fema\_4093\_dr\_wv.pdf.

Gilliam FS and Hockenberry AW. 2006. Effects of atmospheric nitrogen
deposition on the herbaceous layer of a central Appalachian hardwood
forest. J Torrey Bot Soc 133: 240-254.

Grinsted A, Moore JC, and Jevrejeva S. 2012. Homogeneous record of
Atlantic hurricane surge threat since 1923. P Natl Acad Sci USA 109:
19601-19605.

Grinsted A, Moore JC, and Jevrejeva S. 2013. Projected Atlantic
hurricane surge threat from rising temperatures. P Natl Acad Sci USA
110: 5369-5373.

Healey SP, Cohen WB, Zhiqiang Y, and Krankina ON. 2005. Comparison of
tasseled cap-based Landsat data structures for use in forest disturbance
detection. Remote Sens Environ 97: 301-310.

Isaacs RE, Stueve KM, Lafon CW, and Taylor AH. 2014. Ice storms generate
spatially heterogeneous damage patterns at the watershed scale in
forested landscapes. Ecosphere 5: 1-14.

Jin S and Sader SA. 2005. Comparison of time series tasseled cap wetness
and the normalized difference moisture index in detecting forest
disturbances. Remote Sens Environ 94: 364-372.

Keighton S, Miller DK, Hotz D, Moore PD, Perry LB, Lee LG, and Martin
DT. 2016. Northwest Flow Snow Aspects of Hurricane Sandy. Weather
Forecast 31: 173–195.

Lafon CW, Graybeal DR, and Orris KM. 1999. Patterns of ice accumulation
and forest disturbance during two ice storms in southwestern Virginia.
Phys Geogr 20: 97–115.

Lafon CW. 2006. Forest disturbance by ice storms in Quercus forests of
the southern Appalachian Mountains, USA. Ecoscience 13: 30–43.

McBean G. 2004. Climate change and extreme weather: a basis for action.
Nat Hazards 31: 177–190.

Millward AA and Kraft CE. 2004. Physical influences of landscape on a
large-extent ecological disturbance: the northeastern North American ice
storm of 1998. Landscape Ecol 19: 99-111.

Millward AA, Kraft CE, and Warren DR. Ice storm damage greater along the
terrestrial-aquatic interface in forested landscapes. Ecosystems 13:
249-260.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). 2012a. Storm
summary for Superstorm Sandy. Available:
<http://www.erh.noaa.gov/phi/storms/10292012.html>. Accessed 10 February
2014.

NOAA. 2012b. Superstorm Sandy event review, synopsis and highlights
(online). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National
Weather Service. Available from
<http://www.erh.noaa.gov/rnk/events/2012/Sandy/summary.php>.

NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information. 2013. State of the
climate: national snow & ice for annual 2012, published online January
2013, retrieved on April 28, 2017 from
<https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/snow/201213>.

NOAA. 2018. National Weather Service Forecast Office Pittsburgh, PA.
Monthly snowfall for Parsons, WV 1999-2018. Accessed: 7 April 2018.
<http://w2.weather.gov/climate/xmacis.php?wfo=pbz>.

Pasquarella VJ, Holden CE, Kaufman L, and Woodcock CE. 2016. From
imagery to ecology: leveraging time series of all available Landsat
observations to map and monitor ecosystem state and dynamics. Remote
Sensing in Ecology and Conservation 2: 152-170.

Peterson CJ. 2007. Consistent influence of tree diameter and species on
damage in nine eastern North America tornado blowdowns. Forest Ecol
Manag 250: 96-108.

Ramsey EW III, Chappell D, and Baldwin D. 1997. AVHRR imagery used to
identify Hurricane Andrew damage in a forested wetland of Louisiana.
Photogramm Eng Rem S 63: 293-297.

Ramsey EW III, Chappell DK, Jacobs D, et al. 1998. Resource management
of forested wetlands: hurricane impact and recovery mapped by combining
Landsat TM and NOAA AVHRR data. Photogramm Eng Rem S 64: 733-738.

Ramsey EW III, Hodgson ME, Sapkota SK, and Nelson GA. 2001. Forest
impact estimated with NOAA AVHRR and Landsat TM data related to an
empirical hurricane wind-field distribution. Remote Sens Environ 77:
279-292.

Repetto R and Easton R. 2010. Changing climate, more damaging weather.
Issues Sci Technol 26: 67-74.

Sellers PJ. 1985. Canopy Reflectance, photosynthesis, and transpiration.
Int J Remote Sens 6: 1335-1372.

Shi L, Wang H, Zhang W, et al. 2013. Spatial response patterns of
subtropical forests to a heavy ice storm: a case study in Poyang Lake
Basin, southern China. Nat Hazards 69: 2179-2196.

Singh A. 1988. Digital change detection techniques using remotely-sensed
data. Int J Remote Sens 10: 989-1003. Stueve KM, Lafon CW, and Isaacs
RE. Spatial patterns of ice storm disturbance on a forested landscape in
the Appalachian Mountains, Virginia. Area 39: 20-30.

Tanner EVJ, Rodriguez-Sanchez F, Healey JR, et al. 2014. Long-term
hurricane damage effects on tropical forest tree growth and mortality.
Ecology 95: 2974-2983.

Trenberth KE, Fasullo JT, and Shepherd TG. 2015. Attribution of climate
extreme events. Nat Clim Change 5: 725-730.

Turcotte RM, Elliot TR, Fajvan MA, et al. 2012. Effects of ice storm
damage on hardwood survival and growth in Ohio. North J Appl For 29:
53-59.

Turner M and Dale V. 1998. Comparing large, infrequent disturbance: what
have we learned? Ecosystems 1: 493-496.

Wang W, Qu JJ, Hao X, et al. 2010. Post-hurricane forest damage
assessment using satellite remote sensing. Agr Forest Meteorol 150:
122-132.
